Can you hear me?
Uh, yes I can. Oh, great. Great.
So we have five minutes with you.
Um, so you can speak to your submission
and if there is any time left,
then there might be questions for members.
Thank you so much for your submission.
Okay, thank you very much.
Um, my name is, uh, Dr. Murray Boardman,
and I would like to thank the opportunity
to present my submission to the select committee.
Uh, this is the first time I've ever, um, submitted
to a select committee, so it should highlight the,
the issue of importance to me.
Um, for the, um, oral submission, I would like to focus on
three aspects on my, um, my submission.
Firstly, I conditionally support the bill
as it means a return to a single focused, um, uh,
weather forecasting service.
Um, and with the recent storms, the inherent dangers, um,
of the weather requires a singular focus.
Um, in reality, this bull should never have been needed
as its existence, as an emission that the government, um,
of government inefficiency, um, was selected
successive governments having, um, uh, let operate
outside its remit to produce weather forecast
and competition with the Met, excuse me, I have Parkinson's,
so I'm just a bit nervous at the present time.
You're doing really well. Yeah, please carry on.
Um, so I,
I would like to, um, just raised the, the issue,
the conditionality of the, um,
of my sim of my submission around the,
the need to make sure that there is a singular focus tool.
And I just note that niwa weather is still operating
and which makes it me concerned that there will be a
continuation of the dual weather forecasting service under
Earth Sciences New Zealand.
And, um, and I think that, um, there needs to be more
focus on ensuring that when the merger happens,
that the, the current,
um, setup with weather is disbanded.
I think that's really important
and it needs to be strengthened in the, um,
in, in, in this build.
Um, the second part of the bill is, I would like
to sort of see that the bill, the language
that's used in the bill is, is altered a bit.
It talks about the acquisition of the MET Service
by Air Sciences New Zealand,
and I think that that language is unfortunate.
I would like to see it more in the line of
having the MET Service merge with NIWA and the,
and GNS.
Um, the Met Service might, might be a smaller agency,
but it's probably one of the main, um, agencies
that interacts with people on a daily basis in New Zealand.
And so it's qualitative value is probably greater than NIWA
and GNS combined
because everyone, um, needs a weather forecast.
And I think that that intersection, um,
with the public is really important
and it shouldn't be under undervalued by the, um,
um, by a concept of acquisition rather than merger.
So I think that, that that merger
of Air Science Zealand should be between G Service.
Um, one thing I'm curious
about the bill is that it doesn't speak to the, um, the,
the issues of the New Zealand Services Act 90
and the current arrangements, uh, are arrange
that the Minister of Transport is in charge
of the Met Service and the Minister of Transport has the,
um, has the, the authority to, um,
issue or order a, a MET Service in New Zealand.
And, um, I don't see how the, this bill,
um, emphasize or,
or clarifies the responsibility of the, of the minister of,
um, transports risk, um,
role in the methodological services going forward.
And I think that there needs to be
some work done around that.
So at the present time, the, um, the Minister
of Transport has a responsibility
for meteorological services,
but this bill is promoted through the Minister
of State owned enterprises
and the Minister of Science, innovation and Technology.
And I think that there needs to be some work done
to make their, um, the ministerial responsibility
to be singular, um,
because the confusion that there was in the past let,
um, operate outside its reit.
And I think clarifying that is really important.
Um, I think in, in summary,
I would just like to, um, um, say that I,
um, I support the bill,
but the bill needs to be refined in those
specific areas in my submission, particularly
around ensuring that niwa weather is, is disbanded,
um, as part of this, um, merger
and that the, um, methodological Services Act is,
um, is looked into to make sure it's consistent with the,
um, with this bill.
Okay. Thank you.
Have any, any, any comments from the, the panelists? Thank
You. Thank you Dr.
Baldman. We don't have time for any questions.
Uh, we have run out of our time,
but thank you so much for your submission.
Thank you for talking to the select committee. Thank you.
Thank you. Very clear. Thank you, Dr. Baldman.